---
layout: post
title:  "Can direct air carbon capture significantly reduce climate change?"
date:   2019-11-10
permalink: /dac-notes
---
	
By <a href="http://michaelnielsen.org">Michael Nielsen</a>, November
10 2019

**Note:** *Rough and incomplete working notes, me thinking out
loud. I'm not an expert on this, so the notes are tentative, certainly
contain minor errors, and probably contains major errors too, at no
extra charge!  Thoughtful, well-informed further ideas and corrections
welcome.*

In these notes I explore one set of ideas for helping address climate
change: direct air capture (DAC) of carbon dioxide &ndash; basically,
using clever chemical reactions to pull CO2 out of the atmosphere, so
it can be stored or re-used.

It's tempting (and fun) to begin by diving into all the many possible
approaches to DAC. But before getting into any such details, it's
helpful to think about the scale of the problem to be confronted. How
much will DAC need to cost if it's to significantly reduce climate
change?  Let's look quickly at three scenarios for the cost of DAC.

As of 2014, the United States [emits](https://web.archive.org/web/20191019082428/https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-us-greenhouse-gas-emissions) about 6 billion tonnes of CO2
each year. Suppose it cost about 100 dollars per tonne of CO2 to do
direct air capture. To capture the entire annual CO2 production from
the US would cost about 600 billion dollars.

![US EPA graph of CO2 emission](/assets/carbon-capture/epa_emissions.png)

Source: [US EPA](https://web.archive.org/web/20191019082428/https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-us-greenhouse-gas-emissions)

That's a lot of money! As of 2019, the US military budget was about
700 billion dollars, so at 100 dollars per tonne the cost of DAC would
be a little less than the military budget. And it would be a little
over half of [total energy spending](https://web.archive.org/web/20190813091450/https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=40773) in the US (about 1.1 trillion
dollars in 2017). 

Suppose instead that direct air capture cost 10 dollars per tonne. In
this scenario the cost to capture all the US's CO2 emissions would be
about 60 billion dollars per year.

That's still a lot of money, but it's starting to look like the cost
of a *lot* of things humans already do, in government, in commerce,
and even in philanthropy.

A particularly striking cost comparison is to the amount we already
spend on cleaning up or preventing air pollution. In 2011 the US
Environmental Protection Agency [estimated](https://www.epa.gov/clean-air-act-overview/benefits-and-costs-clean-air-act-1990-2020-second-prospective-study) that compliance with
the Clean Air Act cost about 65.5 billion dollars in 2010.

(The choice of year may sound a little odd and dated &ndash; why did I
go all the way back to 2010? In fact, it's not a cherrypicked
year. The EPA only very rarely reports on the costs of the Clean Air
Act, and it happens that 2010 is the most recent year for which an
estimate is available. It is, by the way, in line with the EPA's
estimates for earlier years, and it seems reasonable to assume with
the cost in more recent years.)

So if DAC cost 10 dollars per tonne of CO2, the cost to make the US
carbon neutral would be comparable to the existing cost of compliance
with the Clean Air Act and associated regulations.

To make the comparison more concrete, let me mention the sort of
regulations (and benefits) the Clean Air Act involves. One example is
the imposition of emissions standards on vehicles, and the requirement
that they use catalytic converters to reduce pollution. Catalytic
converters typically run to a few hundreds dollars, and nearly 20
million cars and trucks are sold annually.

Presto: many billions of dollars each year in compliance costs!

Of course, what we get in exchange for this money is far cleaner skies
over our cities, and a much improved quality of life. I don't just
mean that it's pleasant to enjoy smog-free days; I also mean that this
makes a particularly large difference in the quality of life for
asthmatics and people with respiratory diseases, and certainly saves
many, many lives. Overall, it's a very good exchange, in my opinion,
though I know people who disagree.

Returning to direct air capture, it's worth keeping these two numbers
in mind as reference points: at 100 dollars per tonne for DAC, the
cost of DAC is comparable to the US military budget; and at 10 dollars
per tonne for DAC, the cost is comparable to the cost of compliance
with the Clean Air Act and related regulations.

Going even further, at 1 dollar per tonne, the cost of direct air
capture for the US would be about 6 billion dollars per year. It'd be
a rounding error in the US economy, soluble in many, many different
ways. Even the worldwide cost &ndash; more like 40 billion dollars to
capture all global CO2 emissions &ndash; would be quite modest.

None of this tells us at what cost point it's possible to do DAC. It
doesn't tell us how to set up a carbon economy to fund this, or how to
get the political will for any necessary changes (as was required for
the Clean Air Act). It doesn't tell us what to do about other
greenhouse gases, or other countries.

Still, it's helpful to have a ballpark figure to aim for. If DAC is
scalable at $100 per tonne, it starts to get very interesting. At $10
per tonne, the costs start to resemble things we've done before for
environmental concerns. And if it can be done for $1 per tonne, it
starts to look like a small cost of doing business. 

As we'll see in a moment, the $100 and $10 per tonne cost estimates
are at least plausible with existing and, respectively,
not-too-distant-future technology. $1 per tonne is much more
speculative.

What I like and find striking about this frame is that many people are
extremely pessimistic about climate change. They can't imagine any
solution &ndash; often, they become mesmerized by what appears to be
an insoluble collective action problem &ndash; and fall into
fatalistic despair.  This direct air capture frame provides a way of
thinking that is at least plausibly feasible. In particular, the $10
per tonne price point is striking. The Clean Air Act was contentious
and required a lot of political will. But the US did it, and many
other countries have implemented similar legislation. It's a specific,
concrete goal worth thinking hard about.

I've been talking at an abstract level, in terms of government
programs and so on. It's also worth putting these numbers in
individual terms. On average, US citizens produce about 20 tonnes of
CO2 emissions each year. At $100 per tonne for DAC, that's $2,000 each
year. At $10 per tonne, it's $200 each year. And at $1 per tonne, it's
$20 each year. Again, we can see that the $10 per tonne price point
looks very feasible &ndash; $200 is quite a bit of money for most
people, but it's about what they routinely spend for many important
things in their life.

There's a lot of variation in other countries, but among large
countries the US is on the high end of per-capita emissions. In
countries like France and Sweden, which have worked hard on reducing
emissions, the numbers tend to be more like 5 tonnes of CO2 emissions
per year. And so $100 DAC comes out to $500 per person per year, $10
DAC to $50 per person per year, and $1 DAC to $5 per person per year.

I guess it's not exactly popular to memorize numbers and simple
models. Still, I wish people discussing climate change knew these
numbers or some equivalently informative set. I've sat in meetings
about climate change where many attendees appeared to have almost no
quantitative awareness of the scale of the problem. Without such an
awareness of, and facility with, quantitative models, their only
chance of making progress is by accident, in my opinion.

# How much will direct air capture cost, in the near future?

So, how much does direct air capture actually cost? And what are the
prospects for driving the costs down?

Unfortunately, it's not very clear. Although technologies for direct
air capture have been used for many decades, it's usually been done on
a small scale, for reasons unrelated to climate. Doing it at the giant
scales &ndash; ultimately, billions of tonnes! &ndash; required to
impact the climate is quite another matter.

If you read around about direct air capture, you discover a few
things: many approaches have been proposed, with cost estimates
typically ranging from $10 per tonne to $1000 per tonne; those
estimates are often back-of-the-envelope theory, not even based on a
pilot, much less an operating large-scale plant. There's nothing quite
as inexpensive as an industrial plant that exists only on paper.

One of the more detailed proposals comes from the company Carbon
Engineering, which has been working on direct air capture
since 2009. In 2018 they published a [paper](https://www.cell.com/joule/fulltext/S2542-4351(18)30225-3) estimating the costs
associated to direct air capture. Their basic proposal is to build
cooling towers, filled with a liquid that absorbs CO2, running big
fans to blow CO2 over that liquid. They then run the resulting
material through a second process that produces nearly pure CO2 as
output. That CO2 then needs to either be stored or else somehow
re-used, perhaps as raw material for manufacturing fuel or something
similar. That's a dramatic oversimplification, but starts to give you
a basic picture of what they're doing.

![Abstract of the Carbon Engineering paper](/assets/carbon-capture/ce_abstract.png)

Unlike many proposals, Carbon Engineering isn't just working on
paper. They've built a small pilot plant in British Columbia, running
at a rate of a few hundred tonnes of CO2 captured per year. They've
attempted to do detailed costings of all components necessary to make
a large-scale plant, one with a capacity, if run at full utilization
(they estimate it'll be run at about 90% utilization), of removing a
million tonnes of CO2 from the atmosphere each year. They estimate
that it'll cost from $94 to $232 per tonne of carbon removed. The
exact amount depends on details of the configuration the plant is run
in, and also reflects things like possible variations in interest
rates on debt, and so on.

![Photo of pilot plant, sketch of the proposed plant](/assets/carbon-capture/ce_pic.png)

It's tempting to be skeptical of this proposal. For one thing, in the
short term Carbon Engineering has a vested interest in making their
direct air capture scheme look attractive and inexpensive. So caution
is called for. I also lack the expertise to seriously evaluate their
proposal. While to my eye, it looks as though Carbon Engineering has
been careful, maybe they've missed some important factor, and their
estimates are way off. On the other hand, there are at least quite a
few eyes on it &ndash; although the paper was published just a year
ago, in 2018, it's already been cited 132 times, and it's clear it's
seen as something of a gold standard.

There are some interesting critiques of direct air capture in the
scientific literature. For instance, [this 2011 paper](https://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/108/51/20428.full.pdf) by House _et
al_ claims a minimal cost of $1,000 per tonne, based on a relatively
general argument, whose main input appears to be the cost of
electricity. They conclude that &ldquo;many estimates in the
literature appear to overestimate air capture's potential&rdquo;. The
Carbon Engineering paper mentions this paper and similar critiques,
and rebuts it with an argument that amounts to &ldquo;well, we
actually went and built a plant which works, and we did detailed
costings of how to scale it up&rdquo;. This is a good start on a
rebuttal, but obviously as an outsider it'd be good to go back and dig
into both pro and con details much more than I have. That may be a
project I do in the future. For the sake of argument, and the
remainder of these notes, let's stick with Carbon Engineering's
numbers, but keep in mind that they should be taken with a grain of
salt, until examined much more closely.

I must admit, part of the reason I'm inclined to at least be
sympathetic toward Carbon Engineering's estimate is that I read lead
author (and Carbon Engineering's cofounder) David Keith's book about a
different topic, [solar geoengineering](https://www.amazon.com/Climate-Engineering-Boston-Review-Books/dp/0262019825). Keith seemed to me to be
very honest in the book, carefully describing many of his own
uncertainties, the complexities of the problem, and giving charitable
explanations of the position of his critics. None of that makes him
correct, but I'm inclined to believe he's careful, serious, and worth
paying attention to.

An influential [prior study](https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/200555/files/dac2011.pdf) of DAC came in 2011 from an American
Physical Society (APS) study. The costs estimated were much higher,
more in the ballpark of $600 per tonne of CO2.

What accounts for the difference &ndash; likely a factor of 3 or more?

In the words of Carbon Engineering's paper:

> The cost discrepancy is primarily driven by divergent design choices
> rather than by differences in methods for estimating performance and
> cost of a given design. Our own estimates of energy and capital cost
> for the APS design roughly match the APS values.

This is then followed by a relatively detailed (and, to my eye,
plausible) account of the differences in design choices, and how
Carbon Engineering improved on the prior design decisions. I'll say a
bit more about that below.

On its face, the numbers in the Carbon Engineering paper don't seem so
encouraging. Let's call it $200 per tonne. At that level, for the US
to achieve carbon neutrality would cost more than the US currently
spends on energy in total.

What about other approaches? Let's broaden the field, and consider
_negative emissions technologies_ in general, especially those pulling
CO2 directly out of the atmosphere in some way. (In contrast to
technologies which capture carbon at the source of production &ndash;
often a less costly but also less general, more bespoke approach.)

Earlier this year, the US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine released an informative [report](https://www.nap.edu/catalog/25259/negative-emissions-technologies-and-reliable-sequestration-a-research-agenda) surveying negative
emissions technologies. In the report, they attempt to estimate both
cost ranges and the scalability of many different technologies. (For a
summary, see pages 354-356 of the report).

I won't summarize all their results here. But there is much
(cautiously) encouraging news. There are a lot of possible negative
emissions technologies. One approach is *coastal blue carbon* &ndash;
storing carbon in mangroves, marshes, and sea grasses, the kind of
ecosystems one sees along the coastline. This perhaps doesn't sound
terribly promising. But the big advantage is that the carbon tends to
be stored underground, in the soil, and can be stored there for
decades or centuries. The NAS survey reports a cost estimate of $10
per tonne.

That price point is much more encouraging than Carbon
Engineering's. Unfortunately, the report also projects a "potential
[global] capacity with current technology and understanding" of 8-65
billion tonnes. That's not enough for even two years of global CO2
production. At most, this can simply help out.

Another approach is based on storing carbon in forests. The National
Academies report's estimated price is somewhat higher &ndash; from
$15-50 per tonne of CO2. (I don't know if that includes proper burial
&ndash; when trees die they typically return most of their CO2 to the
atmosphere). But the approach is also much more scalable, with an
estimated global capacity of from 570 to 1,125 billion tonnes, using
&ldquo;current technology and understanding&rdquo;.  Per year, the NAS
estimates a capacity of 2.5 to 9 billion tonnes, again using current
technology and understanding. That's global, so it's not enough to
make the world carbon neutral (global CO2 emissions are almost 40
billion tonnes per year). But it's starting to put a sizeable dint in
the problem.

(A caveat to the discussion in this section: I haven't been careful
about which of these numbers include the cost of storing or utilizing
carbon. That's a genuine cost. My impression is that it's likely to
cost less than $20 per tonne, maybe much less, or even turn a
profit. This is based in part on the cost of storing CO2 in the Utsira
formation &ndash; a giant undersea aquifer off Scandinavia &ndash;
where several million tonnes of CO2 have been stored at a
Wikipedia-reported price of 17 dollar per tonne. If this impression is
correct then storage and utiliziation is likely a relatively small
overhead, and the cost of capturing the CO2 currently
dominates. Still, a more complete analysis would be careful about this
costing.)

# How much can the costs drop?

These numbers are tantalizing. Apart from the (probably not scalable)
coastal blue carbon, they're about an order of magnitude away from
where they need to be for climate to be a problem of similar order to
air pollution. But the numbers are also based on &ldquo;current
technology and understanding&rdquo;.

How much can these costs drop with improvements in technology?

The most famous technology cost curves are those associated to Moore's
Law &ndash; the exponential increase in transistor density in
semiconductors, and associated things like computer speed, memory,
energy efficiency, and so on.

This is, in fact, a common (though not universal) pattern across
technologies. It seems to have first been pointed out in a 1936 paper
by the aeronautical engineer Theodore Wright. Wright observed the cost
of producing airplanes dropped along an exponential curve as more were
produced. Very roughly speaking, for each doubling in production,
costs dropped by about 15 percent. Essentially, as they made more
airplanes, the manufacturers learned more, and that helped them lower
their costs.

This pattern of exponential improvement is seen for many technologies,
not just in semiconductors and airplane manufacture. It's been common
in energy too. For instance, the cost of solar energy has dropped by
roughly a factor of 100 over the past four decades
([link](http://news.mit.edu/2018/explaining-dropping-solar-cost-1120), [link](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421518305196)). That cost reduction was driven in part by
technological improvement, and in part by economies of scale.

One wonders: will the cost of direct air capture and other negative
emission technologies follow something like Wright's Law? If so, one
might hope that it would drive the cost of carbon capture in some form
down below 10 dollars per tonne. Indeed, it's even possible to start
to think about whether there's ways it could be made net profitable.

Unfortunately, while Wright's Law is interesting, it's far from a
compelling argument. Indeed, it's a little silly to call it a Law:
it's an observed historical regularity, an observation about the past
for certain technologies. If you're Intel, planning for 5-10 year from
now, you need to set targets. You may perhaps be able to project 1 or
2 years on the basis of in-train improvements. But longer-term
improvements may be more speculative, and require new ideas, ideas
that by definition you can't directly incorporate into your current
models. Studying history is an alternative approach to help set
plausible targets. But eventually such historical regularities break
down. Indeed, we see this in recent years where many aspects of
Moore's Law have started to break down.

And so the fundamental problem here is that we don't know how much the
costs of DAC will go down. At best, we can make guesses. That's a
nervous position to be in &ndash; the usual situation for challenging
problems!

To make this more concrete, let's come back to Carbon Engineering's
proposal for DAC. Here, in more detail, is how they cut the cost by a
factor 3 or so from the APS study. The details won't make much sense,
unless you've read the paper (or similar work); what's important is to
read for the general gist:

> The cost discrepancy is primarily driven by divergent design
> choices&hellip; The most important design choices involved the
> contactor including (1) use of vertically oriented counterflow
> packed towers, (2) use of Na+ rather than K+ as the cation which
> reduces mass transfer rates by about one-third, and (3) use of steel
> packings which have larger pressure drop per unit surface area than
> the packing we chose and which cost 1,700 $/m3, whereas the PVC
> tower packings we use cost less than 250 $/m3. &hellip; In rough
> summary, the APS contactor packed tower design yielded a roughly
> 4-fold higher capital cost per unit inlet area, and also used
> packing with 6-fold higher cost, and 2-fold larger pressure drop.

The paper continues with a discussion of _why_ the APS made those
different design choicees, and also with a discussion of some
differences in the way input energy was used in Carbon Engineering's
design versus the APS design.

I'm not an industrial chemist, but to me those changes sound like
low-hanging fruit. But they're also not the kind of low-hanging fruit
that the APS could have planned for in 2011. If they could have
planned for it, they would have come up with a different cost
estimate.

Of course, low-hanging fruit is what you'd expect. Carbon Engineering
has been, until recently, a tiny company, with a small handful of
staff. They were founded in 2009, and appear to have subsisted on
relatively small grants and seed funding until 2019, when they raised
68 million dollars. It's interesting to think about what they'll
achieve with that funding. Hopefully, they'll be able to pick some
slightly higher-hanging fruit. Assuming their initial cost estimates
bear out, for this design, will it be possible for them (or someone
else working on direct air capture) to achieve another factor of 3
reduction in cost?

I've focused a lot on Carbon Engineering, and it sounds like I'm
bullish about their approach. Actually, I'm too ignorant to have a
really strong opinion. From my point of view, the benefit of Carbon
Engineering is that they've been quite detailed about what they've
been pursuing. That makes them a useful example to dig into. And my
tentative conclusion is that _direct air capture offers a promising
but far from certain approach to making major progress on climate
change_. And, more broadly: _negative emissions technologies offer an
extremely promising approach to making major progress on climate
change_.

In particular, while the current approach to DAC obviously costs too
much, I think it's at least plausible that DAC can be done at a cost
point more like $10 per tonne. Here we have a situation where
relatively little work has been done developing a technology. Compared
to the billions spent on improving solar, say, work on DAC is really
just getting started. It seems very promising that they're starting
only an order of magnitude (or two, if you take more skeptical
estimates) away from a cost at which it can plausibly make a huge dint
in the climate problem.

(Aside: I've been focusing on cost reductions. In fact, part of the
job will be done in a very different way. The _carbon intensity_ of a
country is the CO2 emissions per dollar of GDP. Carbon intensities in
the US dropped more than 18% per decade from 1990 to 2014, the latest
year for which the World Bank reports numbers. This isn't surprising:
all other things equal, most people and companies try to keep doing
things in more energy-efficient ways. If this drop in carbon intensity
continues, it means that considered as a fraction of the total
economy, the cost of DAC will go down. Effectively, it's as though
we're automatically making progress toward the $10 DAC goal, at a rate
of about 18 percent per decade. On its own that won't make DAC
economically feasible. But over a couple of decades, it'll help a
lot!)

I got interested in direct air capture in part after reading Matt
Nisbet's survey of US climate and energy foundation funding
([summary here](https://web.northeastern.edu/matthewnisbet/2018/05/21/summary-of-strategic-philanthropy-in-the-post-cap-and-trade-years-reviewing-u-s-foundation-climate-and-energy-funding-at-wires-climate-change/), with a link to the full survey). Here's his
summary chart. Note that it covers funding from 19 major funders of
climate and energy work, and the years from 2011 to 2015:

![Graph by Nisbet summarizing breakup of US climate and energy foundation funding](/assets/carbon-capture/nisbet_balance.png)

You see enormous sums of money going into renewable energy,
sustainable aagriculture, and into opposing fossil fuels. But just a
tiny fraction of the spending &ndash; 1.9%, or just over 10 million
dollars &ndash; went to other low carbon energy technologies. And of
that, just $1.3 million went to evaluate carbon capture and storage.

Now, admittedly, these numbers focus on just a tiny slice of the total
funding pie (US foundation funding), and are somewhat outdated.
Still, my impression is that the qualitative picture from Nisbet's
research holds more broadly.  Humanity's collective priorities are
research and development focused on renewable energy sources,
especially solar and wind; and anti-fossil fuel messaging and
lobbying. By contrast, negative emissions technologies like DAC are
receiving relatively little funding.

As a non-expert, I'm reluctant to hold too firm opinions here. But,
frankly albeit tentatively I think this makes no sense! Of course,
renewables (say) should receive a lot of funding. But if you genuinely
believe climate change is a huge threat, then we should collectively
and determinedly pursue lots of different strategies. Direct air
capture (and, more broadly, negative emissions) look very underfunded
and underexplored. Yes, it requires considerable improvement. But
compared to other historic technologies, it's within striking distance
of being able to have a huge impact, especially considering the
relatively minor effort so far put into it.

# Conclusion

This is a tiny slice through a tiny slice (direct air capture) of the
climate problem.  Climate is intimidating in part because the scale of
understanding required is so immense.  You can spend a lifetime
studying the relevant parts of just one of: the climate, the energy
industry, solar, wind, nuclear, politics, economics, social norms.
It's extremely difficult to get an overall picture; it's easy to miss
very big things.  I wrote these notes mostly because the only way I
know to get a handle on big problems is to start by doing detailed
investigations of many tiny corners. So consider this one tiny corner.

To finish, I can't resist reporting an uncommon opinion: overall, I'm
optimistic about climate.

I've focused on direct air capture (and, to some extent, negative
emissions technologies), but it seems to me there are many other
promising approaches.  I believe humans will figure out how to address
climate change. There will be a lot of suffering along the way, much
of it falling to the world's poorest people. That's a terrible
tragedy, and something we're too late to entirely avert.  But over the
long term work on this problem will *also* lead us to strengthen
existing institutions, and to invent new institutions, institutions
which will make life far better for billions of people.  It's a huge
challenge, and I think we'll rise to the challenge, and make human
civilization better off for it.

*Acknowledgments:* Thanks to Andy Matuschak for conversations about
climate.

Please [help support my work on Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/quantumcountry), and
please [follow me on Twitter](https://twitter.com/michael_nielsen).
